---
layout: post
title: A day in the Open Source world.
date: 2025-05-08
tags:
- FOSS
- Tech
---

# A day in the Open Source world.

I was tinkering with one of the [PR](https://github.com/knadh/listmonk/issues/2234) in Listmonk (An open source newsletter subscription manager) for a feature that pulls out all the tags across the lists of subscribers to show in the dropdown when the user adds a new tag in Lists. I suggested a technical solution for this use case by pulling all the tags from the table, compressing them, and sending them as an API response to the frontend. In the frontend, make it a searchable drop-down by using Fuse.js.

Fuse.js is a lightweight fuzzy search JS library that uses the [bitap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitap_algorithm) algorithm, which is closely related to the Levenshtein algorithm. To see how these algorithms help with fuzzy search, I explored them and tried a few code snippets to tweak them.

As time passed, my little one woke from the nap, and we played ball and watched the rain. It's the month of May, a peak summer time, and here in our hometown the weather plays in and out game with scorching sun during the day and heavy downpour in the evening. Rainfall in our town means a mandatory power cut, and we all sit in the verandah at our home, watching the water fall through the pipe. My father was ranting about climate change and how this rain in May affects the mango harvest. Randomly, the word "May" struck me that it is Maintainers Month. In [FOSSUnited](https://fossunited.org/) socials, they post about the story of each project and its maintainers for this month. I checked my mobile to find the project for that day. It is Dictpress, maintained by [knadh](https://nadh.in/), who also maintains Listmonk. It's a web app that helps you to build, publish a fast, searchable any language dictionary. Suddenly, I started to think about how the searchable part in this dictionary is handled, and somehow felt this could give me a clue on the best ways to figure out a solution for my Listmonk PR. With a 4-year-old kid hopping around, I don't get longer timeframes to process such thoughts. So I usually have a set of 2 notebooks with me always. One for all my technical learning and the other for all my work. I scribbled my thoughts and went back again to play.

After our dinner and storytelling time, we wound down for sleep. Still, the fuzzy search part was occupied in my brain, and I started to tinker with Dictpress. Digging through an OS project is more like searching through old trunks or almirahs for me. There may be a surprise waiting for you. On digging through that project, I figured out that to support fuzzy search, this project uses a phonetic algorithm. Dictpress is a project to support dictionaries in any language. Olam, an online Malayalam dictionary, and Alar, an online Kannada dictionary, were created through Dictpress. I read from [here](https://zerodha.tech/blog/alar-the-making-of-an-open-source-dictionary/) to know the backstory behind this library. To support search in these language dictionaries, a phonetic tokenisation algorithm, KLPhone(Kannada) and MLPhone(Malayalam), supporting these languages, is added. While simple stemming of the word can be used as tokens to support search in this project, Alar and Olam both use a phonetic tokenisation algorithm that takes into account the pronunciation of words and shows similar-sounding words in the search. This made me try my hand at creating a phonetic tokenisation algorithm for my mother tongue, Tamil. Taking inspiration from KLPhone and MLPhone, I went ahead and started creating one. I can speak, read, and write Tamil, while I can't do any of that in Malayalam and Kannada. So with reference to those algorithms, I tried creating one for Tamil. So I started with adding vowels(Uyir Ezhuthugal), consonants(Mei Ezhuthugal), Modifiers (Kombu), and Compounds( Mei Ezhuthu Serkai). Two striking things I noticed on this process are

1. Malayalam has special consonant letters marked as Chillus with dedicated Unicode characters.

2. Compounds in Tamil are two individual characters, while in Malayalam and Kannada, it is all single characters. While it has two individual consonants, the second consonants modify the sound of the first one in Tamil. For example, the combination of **க்** (k) + **ச** (ch) becomes **க்‌ச** (kcha), which is a compound consonant sound. This differs from just writing **க்** and **ச** separately. So adding this mapping with frequent compounds takes into account the sound and hence improves the phonetic tokenisation part well.

Through the entire process of going through the KLPhone, MLPhone, and trying to create my own [TMPhone](https://github.com/Bowrna/tmphone), I am surprised to learn about the beautiful elements that each languages support uniquely. In some way, it felt like it was straightforward to express a phonetic algorithm for Tamil. Vowels, consonants, compounds, and modifiers all follow a simple pattern, and phonetical expression seems clean. Maybe I am biased here as I am a native speaker.

Side Note: It's not mandatory to write and plug a phonetic algorithm for creating a dictionary in Dictpress. The docs suggested ways like simple stemming or a non-phonetic algorithm. This tokenisation of the word is persisted in the database along with the word entry and used for searching through [tsvector](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-textsearch.html) in PostgreSQL. Postgres has built-in support for stemming for full text search and offers support for about 29 languages. I found that Tamil is one of the supported languages in Postgres and went to dig deeper to figure out how Tamil is supported in this list. Postgres discussion [thread](https://www.postgresql.org/message-id/20180925114506.GA14666@zakirov.localdomain) took me to another repo snowball system, through which Postgres supports this stemming. On digging deeper into the snowball system, I found a Tamil person has [contributed](https://github.com/snowballstem/snowball/pull/3) to this library to include support for the language. My day ended satisfyingly, and once again, I affirmed that FOSS is wonderful. :)